Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and Daryl Lane.
One of the most honored and respected of today's science fiction authors is the English writer Brian Aldiss.
His first science fiction story was published in 1954, and since then he's won every award the field has to offer, both in this country and throughout Europe.
Aldiss is a craftsman of the highest order.
The attention he gives to style, character, and structure demonstrates the literary polish that often distinguishes British science fiction from American.
He's written a few non-science fiction novels, in fact, that have been bestsellers in England.
We asked him why he chose to concentrate his career in science fiction rather than mainstream literature.
Well, I regard myself as a writer, and this difference that seems to be so apparent to other people is not so apparent to me.
I'm interested in a kind of literature of ideas, and sometimes that strays to one side of the science fiction fence and sometimes to another.
But it's not as though one day I'm riding a horse and the next day I'm riding a cow.
It's just that I'm in the same vehicle all the time, but sometimes the identification marks change.
That's the way I see it.
In some of his personal essays on science fiction, Aldiss tells of how he was introduced to the field as a child through lurid pulp magazines he found at Woolworths.
His family disapproved of his reading such literature, but Aldiss was fascinated and wouldn't give it up.
He explains why he was so drawn to science fiction at an early age.
I believe it was really that I never had a firm conviction as a child that the world was as all the grown-ups claimed it to be.
It seemed to me that it was a much more interesting place than any of them believed, or that they sought to deny it was an interesting place at all.
They were all busy working in their shops and making their money and leading their routine lives.
And I was a bit of a kind of escapologist, you see, when I was a child.
I picked up a phrase from an old cowboy movie where one of the wrestlers says out of the corner of his mouth,
Let's go while the going's good.
And that became a kind of motto for me.
And at the age of four, I was the hottest rustler in East Dereham, Norfolk.
And I used to go while the going was good.
So I had that streak of wildness in me, I suppose you could say.
Aldiss' streak of wildness later led to unique experiments in some of his science fiction novels.
He gained a reputation as an innovator, as a science fiction author who wasn't afraid to introduce new styles and concepts into a fairly traditional field.
Two good examples of his innovative techniques were the novels Report on Probability A and Barefoot in the Head, published in the late 60s.
Their complex styles were avant-garde and confusing to many science fiction readers.
We asked Aldiss if he deliberately sought to open up science fiction or enlarge its boundaries with such experiments.
Well, you understand that's not exactly a motive in writing to expand the field.
I think what you think you're doing at the time is trying to find a little...
How shall we mix the metaphor?
Trying to find a little breathing space where the ground isn't too trampled already by the hordes of other writers.
And so you seek out, I suppose, the perimeters of the field as it's currently defined.
And in that way, if you accidentally extend it well, that's very nice.
And of course, some people are grateful to you and other people are very cross with you for doing it because they say you're breaking the rules.
Next time, we'll talk with Brian Aldiss about some of his works.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
[Music.]
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews.
In 1973, Brian Aldiss published a book
on the origin and history of science fiction
entitled Billion Year Spree.
He gave us an interesting account of the reasons he wrote the book
including some comments on one of his novels,
Barefoot in the Head.
Well, I'd written a novel called Barefoot in the Head, and it really didn't receive a very kind initial attention although the premise was simple enough.
Barefoot in the Head was about the world stopped in its tracks by drugs.
This was the late 60s, remember?
When the flower power people had been around and we had had all this love-in stuff
and towards the end of the 60s, the bills, as we say in England
the checks were coming in for all that kind of stuff
and they were already finding the fetuses
in the trash cans of Haight-Ashbury
so that Barefoot in the Head was an ambivalent book written in a difficult language
and I was a little surprised at the tepid response it got,
the angry response it got, the anonymous letters.
So I thought, well, let's be finished with the science fiction field,
and I thought, well, before I leave it, I ought to write down all that I know and love about it before I forget,
and so really I settled down with that in mind to write Billion Year Spree and also to have an argument as I raised my hat and left the science fictional community,
but by the time I got to the end of the thing, you know, three years had passed and just writing the book turned me on to science fiction again.
Billion Year Spree is full of Aldiss' personal but fascinating ideas.
One provocative idea, heresy to some science fiction fans, was that Hugo Gernsback, the father of modern science fiction, was a disastrous influence on the field
We asked Aldiss what he meant by that.
Well, as you probably know that I did say something of that sort and since then people have been threatening to break my legs and my arms and shoot me and hang me, and kick me out of the science fiction field and all sorts of things like that,
but I guess that what I was worried about was the way science fiction was segregated by Gernsback into a magazine,
so that if you wanted to find science fiction you had to go to a magazine that had a name like Astounding or Amazing or Staggering
which had a huge three-dimensional title with rivets in it that resulted in a monoculture,
and we all know that there are dangers in monoculture and,
I simply thought that science fiction would be better as an uncaged animal that could rove at large where it would,
but nowadays people complain that science fiction is segregated and that people think you're funny if you read it,
and that it has to have a special place in a bookshop right next to weirdo cult books about flying saucers or whatever.
Well my answer to that is that yes I agree.
I think that's too bad.
I think science fiction is much better than that but the reason why it is there is because of the segregation that was introduced by Hugo Gernsback that was my argument.
Anyone seeking to gain a perspective on science fiction and fantasy should read Billion Year Spree, a personal but fascinating account of the field by one of science fiction's true men of letters.
Tomorrow, more with Brian Aldiss.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show
So stay with us
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show
A commentary on science fiction and fantasy
And here are your hosts. This is David Crews and Daryl Lane.
Brian Aldiss does unexpected but fascinating things in his science fiction stories.
Though Aldiss is often an innovator,
He also understands and cherishes the traditions of science fiction.
Aldiss has demonstrated his fondness for science fiction's past by redoing some of its classic novels.
An Island Called Moreau, for instance was based on H.G. Wells' The Island of Dr. Moreau,
And his book Frankenstein Unbound
Drew on Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, published in 1818, which some call the first science fiction novel.
Aldiss relates the impulse behind his writing of Frankenstein Unbound.
I think that I write about the things that fascinate me most, and I'm kind of a literary man and I certainly much admire Mary Shelley's Frankenstein.
It's the most remarkable work for anyone, not least for a young lady not quite touching 18.
And when I had the impulse to write Frankenstein Unbound,
It was really an exegetical impulse to draw everybody's attention if possible to the excellence of that original novel,
Which as you know has been slandered and pilloried by the filmmakers who've seen nothing better in it than a stupid, shambling, and inarticulate monster.
I wanted to restore the monster to his true evil power as an articulate feeling and maimed being worthy of our compassion and perhaps our hatred.
Aldiss says there was a true creative impulse behind Frankenstein Unbound but that wasn't so for An Island called Moreau.
I have to admit that later on I did the same thing with Wells' Island of Dr. Moreau and that was I believe ill-advised
It's one of the few novels I've written that didn't begin with some kind of genuine lust to create will to create with fire in my stomach.
I just thought it was something I could do and that was too tiny a motive I believe for the book that I eventually turned out.
I don't believe that it supersedes or in any way aids the Wells version.
The funny thing is I have to say that that novel was extremely well received in this country and in Great Britain.
Another Aldiss tribute to science fiction's past is his novella The Saliva Tree.
It's a playful book, a clever tribute to H.G. Wells who happens to be an unseen character in it.
It's about an invisible alien monster ravaging the countryside of late Victorian England.
Invading monsters and invisibility are two of Wells' themes of course and during the story all of Wells' themes and the titles of his books are somehow worked in.
The story's main character Gregory Rolles has been writing letters to H.G. Wells about the happenings in the countryside.
Wells comes to meet Rolles as the story ends.
Our central character is about to relate to H.G. Wells the horrific events that have gone on down on the farm.
And in those events are really the germs for all of Wells' science fiction.
I mean, you know, there's, there's a kind of a, a joke on H.G. Wells there. I mean we all owe a great debt to H.G. Wells because he preempted almost all of the science fiction themes.
And so in a way the saliva tree is a kind of horrific joke to show that in fact Wells didn't have any original ideas.
They were all given to him by this guy who knocks on the door at the end of the story.
More on the works of Brian Aldiss next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is Daryl Lane and David Crews.
English science fiction author Brian Aldiss sometimes writes books which are difficult to categorize.
Aldiss has written familiar science fiction such as his first novel which was published in this country in 1959 as Starship.
But many of his novels are experimental or avant-garde in both theme and structure.
Report on Probability A, published in 1969 is a good example of this type.
A 1976 novel though, The Malacia Tapestry, is one of his most unique novels, a strange but richly rewarding book, and it completely resists categories.
It could be called science Fiction, but it's not quite that. Some might say it's fantasy, but it's not that either
Aldiss talks about the inspiration behind the book.
The model I had was a pictorial one that's often the case
Well in several of my novels, I start from a pictorial beginning,
and my pictorial beginnings with Malacia were the etchings which the Italian artist, the Baroque artist GBT Epilo, made at the end of his life
Towards the end of his life, he retired and he started etching
these mysterious little pictures of wizards, mountebanks, soldiers, punchinellos, people being dug out of the ground from graves, owls, serpents burning on altars,
All sorts of mysterious symbols in these lovely little pictures, and no one's actually figured out what they're meant to be.
It's like a science fictional alternative world where magic rules, I suppose you'd say.
And I suppose that was one of the things I liked about them.
So I thought, well if no one else can reconstruct this world to their satisfaction, I'll have a go at it.
And so I started writing short stories around the more haunting of these etchings of Tiepolo's.
Malacia itself is a grand city which exists in what appears to be an alternate universe suggestive of Earth's ancient past
There is no technology to speak of, sorcery of a limited sort seems to work.
And there are all manner of exotic creatures such as flying beings which resemble humans.
The novel's main concern is art, an unusual theme for a science fiction or fantasy book, seemingly more appropriate for a romantic poet.
Aldiss told us that the theme of art came out of a serious illness he had while writing the book.
The effect of this internal complaint I had this hepatitis made me feel that, well my life span was limited and I had frolicked about a good deal.
And had written some books that I perhaps didn't take as seriously as I should do.
And that what I dearly loved was writing and that I wanted to make a statement about art.
And really Malacia is, it's all about art from the title onwards.
If the book has a power, it is the power of meditations on the nature of art which is at once to transfigure and at the same time to petrify
And as you know Malacia itself is a city-state under a curse of zero change. Well that's like a work of art.
It's like Tiepolo's little etchings. They may be forever enigmatic to us, but they're forever unchanging.
The Malacia Tapestry, by one of the masters of modern science fiction, a difficult novel to categorize but a fascinating one to read.
More with author Brian Aldiss on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science Fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is David Crews and Daryl Lane.
Brian Aldiss' latest science Fiction novel is the masterful achievement of an author who is at the height of his very awesome powers.
It's called Helliconia Spring, and it's the first volume of a trilogy about an Earth-like planet called Helliconia. Aldiss tells us about the planet and the books.
Helliconia is the name of a planet that's really much like Earth and a lot of Earth-like things go on there, but it is the child of binary suns,
And it takes two and a half thousand years to go round the primary. I mean two and a half thousand Earth years,
Which is to say that between one winter and the next, you can have a whole lot of civilizations doing a whole lot of declining and falling,
and of course falling and rising.
And so that these three long volumes really just cover parts of one of Helliconia's great years.
So there's at once this marvelous continuity as I see it of one year and yet of many generations and many cultures.
And that's the basic plan of the book.
They're simply titled. The first one is Helliconia Spring. That's the one that's out.
The one I'm writing is Helliconia Summer and after that I go on to Helliconia Winter.
After centuries of a deadening winter, spring is coming to Helliconia and the primitive men of the planet are waking up to the greater possibilities of life, to higher aspirations and knowledge, to the construction of a new civilization
The first volume traces the life of a nomadic hunter named Yuli and his descendants.
Because the first volume is about the sun bursting out.
The first volume is just stacked full of things bursting out, and people bursting out, animals bursting out. It's a great bursting out novel.
Circling Helliconia is a satellite from Earth, a huge observation station which monitors everything that happens in Helliconia and beams it to Earth.
Aldiss spent a painstaking four years on the book striving for accuracy and realism.
Well I hope people will find that it's full of reality.
That's why I say the moral of it should be mere existence. Because I think they recognize their own lives passing through the book.
And the other motive I had was that I grew rather alarmed at the way so much science fiction since it's become more popular has been full of what shall we say fantasy wish fulfillment.
I didn't like that.
I think that science fiction should reflect the facts of life, the hard facts of life.
It shouldn't just be some nonsense about one guy against a malign empire who goes out and you know kills the chief baddie. I thought it should have a little more contact for reality.
And moreover I'll sound old fashioned if I say this, but I think that sort of thing is better for the nation's youth than the old hogwash about telepathic dragons and all the rest of it.
Helliconia Spring is a remarkable and unique achievement by a man who is not just a great science fiction writer but one of the finest writers of our time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of The Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction With Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.